[music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Eisenthal. Joe, I love doing
American history episodes in part
because I feel like my own knowledge of
American history is fairly simplistic
and I do remember a huge culture shock
when I went from high school to college
and I think I told this story before. So
I went to college, university in London
and I had always heard the American
Revolution described as the American
Revolution, right? And then as soon as I
get to the UK,
>> I What do they call I never Yeah. What
do they call it?
>> Yeah, they call it I think the American
War of Independence, which has a
different tonality to it.
>> Definitely.
>> But it definitely demonstrates just how
subjective tensions, conflicts, and
policies can actually be in history
depending on who you're talking to. and
we are going to talk about not just a
pretty subjective American policy but
one that has been reinterpreted and
amended many many times in the past.
>> Right? So obviously for us this has been
a Venezuela week and there's all sorts
of immediate questions that are sort of
most directly relevant to we've been
talking about the market elements
mostly. We talked about oil, we talked
about the uh sovereign debt etc. But
then there's all these questions of
course about international law and what
is legitimate and what is illegitimate
and I mean I couldn't even believe the
headline when I saw it that we had
arrested I know this I I I was flabber I
just the idea that that we had arrested
a head of state from another country is
just absolutely gobsmacking and then
people talk about international law and
then they say does international law
even exist and so forth and what it
feels like to some extent truly
uncharted territory. here.
>> Yep. Uncharted territory. But people are
drawing on a parallel.
>> Yes.
>> Which is the Monroe Doctrine.
>> The Monroe Doctrine of I think it was
1823 I want to say basically said that
America would assert its dominance over
the entire American region. And uh since
then it's changed a number of times. But
the way it's being talked about now is
as
the Trump corollery or the Dawn Row
doctrine which was described in the
national security strategy document that
the Trump administration put out back in
December and that one's a little
different. So we keep seeing these
amendments to the doctrine. By the way,
I should just say, do you remember back
in 2013, John Kerry explicitly said that
the Monroe doctrine was over? It was
dead.
>> I don't remember that.
>> And now it's back. It's arisen.
>> Some version of it is certainly back.
You know, it's very interesting because
the US clearly has a longstanding
history of various operations,
overt and covert, of involving itself,
shall we say, [laughter] with the
politics and domestic affairs of our
neighbors, particularly in South and
Central America and so forth. I suppose
any country is naturally going to have
some security interest in what's
happening, its proximity. I don't think
that itself is particularly weird. I
really like this term, the Donroe
doctrine, because there's two things.
There's this long-standing history that
the US wants to have a role to play in
everyone else's politics among our
neighbors. But then there's this other
element with Donald Trump specifically
where it feels like a lot of our policy
and principle is essentially he's the
president and what's in his head and his
ideas are legitimate because they're his
ideas and he's the president. So yes,
there's precedents, there's norms and so
forth, and then there is this sort of
novelty that everyone's trying to read
his mind. And we're in this very, very
strange situation, which [snorts] uh has
come up on our last two episodes in
which you have the president talking
about oil and
>> explicitly. Yeah.
>> And yet people are like skeptical. It's
very strange. It's a very strange
situation because you have to like, oh,
he admitted it. It's about oil. And yet
everyone's like, is there something else
at play beyond here? It's the total
inversion for how people have talked in
the past about the legitimacy or
illegitimacy of how we involve ourselves
internationally.
>> That was part of the original Monroe
doctrine as well. There was this weird
tension between like pro-democracy,
anticolonialism, keep the European
powers out.
>> Yeah. and America basically kind of
creating its own informal colonies. That
tension has always been there and uh we
should talk about that. We should talk
about whether or not there might be, you
know, different strategies at play in
Venezuela, different goals. And I'm
happy to say we do in fact have the
perfect guest. We're going to be
speaking with Greg Grandon. He is a
professor of history at Yale and the
author of the new book America America:
A New History of the New World. So,
Greg, welcome to OddLots. Thanks so much
for coming on.
>> Oh, thanks for having me.
>> How important has the Monroe Doctrine
actually been in the history of American
policy and development?
>> Well, it's certainly been influential
and it's certainly been cited repeatedly
over the years. I mean, first, I think
we need to back up and say exactly what
makes it a doctrine. Yeah.
>> It was never voted on. Uh, no court
ratified it. It didn't actually assume
the status of doctrine until a couple of
decades after it was pronounced in 1823
when James Monroe was president at the
time. And this was around the time that
most SpanishAmerican
nations were breaking from Spain in
their successful wars of independence
which were much longer and dragged out
than the US war for independence. By
1823, it was fairly clear that Spain was
going to lose its empire. And the United
States finally decided that it was going
to [snorts] issue a statement. And you
have to understand that the doctrine
itself or Monroe's statement, it's
really just a kind of, you know, four or
five non-ontiguous paragraphs in the
State of the Union address of 6,000
words. You know, it's you have to kind
of cherrypick through the through the
State of the Union address to find what
is the doctrine. and it's hesitant. It's
cautious. The United States wasn't
really sure where it wanted to land on
on any given issue. And there were
obviously tensions and differences of
opinions within Monroe's cabinet. I
mean, to put it in more modern terms,
you had isolationists, you had
internationalists, you had
unilateralists. So you had different
people thinking of different ways on how
the United States should address and
deal with on the one hand these new
republics that were coming into being in
South America and in Central America and
in Mexico and on the other hand their
former colonial rulers in Europe. And so
it was actually written by John Quincy
Adams who was Monroe's secretary of
state. And as I said, it was inserted in
different parts. And and it's true. It
it is it is a bit of a contradictory
document. On the one hand, it announces
that the United States considers the
independence of Latin America or at the
time Spanish America to be irreversible
and that it was recognizing a number of
states that had established effective
sovereignty and unbroken with Spain. and
it warned off Europe, not just Spain,
but any country Spain might recruit to
help them or the Holy Roman Empire or a
Great Britain against trying to conquer
or reconquer the Americas, any part of
the Americas. So that's the kind of
anti-colonial part of the doctrine and
again in quotation marks the doctrine.
Then other paragraphs said that the
United States and Spanish America being
of the Western Hemisphere shared certain
special interests and ideals although it
didn't specify what those interests and
ideals were but people kind of presumed
they meant the difference between
monarchy and republicanism but at least
there was a kind of gesture to a kind of
shared fraternity of nations that had
common interests.
And so that's another part of the Monroe
Doctrine. And then there was the part
that was referenced that it didn't
exactly grant the United States much
power in terms of policing the
hemisphere. It was a vague sentence that
said the United States would interpret
events that happened anywhere in the
Western Hemisphere on how they bear on
the quote peace and happiness of the
United States. It was [laughter] you.
So, so it was a document that could
appeal to a lot of different
constituencies within the United States.
Like Thomas Jefferson's expansionism,
this notion that, you know, the new
world was shared a certain unity of
purpose. John Quincy Adams was a famous
isolationist and unilateralist. And so
there was this notion of the United
States could act if it wanted, if it saw
a threat. And uh you have somebody like
Henry Klay who imagined a kind of large
American system, a mercantile system in
which the US would be a great
manufacturing base and Latin America,
Spanish America would supply resources
in order to rival
the United Kingdom and the empires of
Europe. But the point being, it really
wasn't much of anything. Latin Americans
did like it. I mean, they had a lot of
time to read. It was a different period.
There were no iPhones. [clears throat]
you know, people read closely and said,
"Oh, well, that that's an interesting
paragraph." And what they read and liked
mostly was they thought it was a they
read it as a kind of amicus brief for
their own anti-colonialism.
Spanish Americans were very much vocal
in their idea that the doctrine of
conquest was no longer valid. The
doctrine of discovery was no longer
valid. there was no undiscovered land in
the new world waiting for Europeans to
stumble upon and claim as their own. And
they read the Monroe Doctrine as largely
supporting that position, especially the
part that warned Europe against trying
to reconquer any countries that had
claimed their independence.
But over the years, it was interpreted
in a different way. politicians and
diplomats, particularly in skirmishes
with with uh with Europe, say Great
Britain, when Great Britain wanted to
build a canal through Central America.
That was around the time that those kind
of vague scattered remarks were elevated
to the level of doctrine and it became
the Monroe Doctrine or the doctrine of
Monroe. And from that point forward, it
was progressively incorporated into
something we might call customary law. I
mean, again, what makes a doctrine a
doctrine and who gets to enforce it? It
really is just a question of power goes
to what you were talking about in the
introduction about what is international
law and and and how is it enforced. I
mean, most countries have statements of
principles. The United States gets its
own doctrine.
>> Yeah. It's really interesting, isn't it?
Because like to some extent when I think
about American involvement it's like all
around the world at any time we sort of
feel the need to fight against
communists right that seems to be a very
common thing and fight for democracies
or any country that sort of has
something similar to our way of
government or something like that we
seem to be on principle we have to be
the ones or we feel compelled to
intervene and then here is this
geographical element that seems very
different. Can you talk a little bit
about the intersection of the
geographical impulse to sort of exert
your influence uh among your neighbors
and how that intersects with this other
I don't know we call it principle a
doctrine etc where there are just
certain kinds of leaders that we don't
like and when they're in power we do
what we can to eliminate them.
>> Yes. And this goes to the history of the
United States, its relationship to its
own hemisphere and the power that it has
exerted over the Latin America and
Spanish America and Brazil and then its
efforts at times to go global to become
a more global superpower. There's been,
you know, there's long different
iterations of this in which the United
States kind of tries to escape the
boundaries of its hemisphere and become
a world power at different moments and
then and then it falls back to the
Western Hemisphere. This has happened
over and over again. It happened with
the Great Depression. It happened uh uh
in some ways with um you know after
Vietnam, the United States turned back
to Latin America. It happened after the
certainly after the catastrophic war on
terror. I mean in many ways what's
happening now with Trump is an example
of this this kind of you know uh Trump
is his own problem and a a lot of the
things that are wrong is is of his
doing. But he did inherit a country that
was in profound crisis as a result of
the catastrophic war on terror, the
financial crisis, the inability of
politicians to deal with the corporate
wealth and inequality and and so there
is a kind of turning back to Latin
America and we can get to this a little
bit later if you want, but Trump's
actions in Venezuela are a perfect
example of what happens when, you know,
the United States, you know, its bid to
go global fails and it has to return to
its hemisphere. And that's why the
Monroe Doctrine is so important. Latin
America is the first place in which the
United States got a sense of itself as
an overseas power. You know, was able to
project its power, its financial power,
its cultural power, its military power
beyond its own borders. And even saying
that is a little bit tricky because the
United States borders were always
changing. I mean, the United States
borders the expansive nature of the
United States where it actually took
Texas and took Mexico. So, it wasn't
just that it was dealing with Latin
America, it was literally gobbling up
Latin America on its way to the Pacific.
But setting that aside, working within
the hemisphere and learning how to deal
with other nations,
Latin America is absolutely central to
that. And that's one of the reasons why
the Monroe doctrine rises in importance
because it supposedly provides a kind of
guideline for that. Now over the years
the Monroe doctrine itself has expanded.
Presidents explicitly expanded over a
boundary dispute in Venezuela and Guyana
in which the United States was
supporting Venezuela and Great Britain
was supporting British Guyana. Grover
Cleveland declared that the Monroe
Doctrine granted the United States
absolute sovereignty over the whole
Western Hemisphere. That's a [laughter]
that's a pretty big jump from, you know,
we're going to interpret any event that
happens somewhere on our peace and
happiness, [laughter]
our bears on our peace and happiness to
by fiat, our will is law in the
hemisphere. And then in 1904
along similar lines Theodore Roosevelt
when he was president he expanded the
doctrine with his own coralary to what
he called international police power to
suppress chronic wrongdoing in Latin
America. Now I I must say that most of
that chronic wrongdoing was provoked by
US banks and US mercenaries and US oil
extractors and you know there's a long
history and of like forcing loans on
countries that they can't pay off and it
leads to all sorts of instability then
civil war and then the US government is
called in to settle the problem that
these private interests created. So
Roosevelt expands the Monroe Doctrine
into a kind of standing universal police
warrant that will allow the United
States act whenever it will and whenever
it [music] wants.
[music]
So, didn't FDR also reinterpret it, but
it didn't last long. Another Roosevelt
reinterpretation?
>> No, not really. But FDR actually
reversed course 180 degrees. And in
1933, he
>> he renounced the right of the United
States to intervene. There's
long-standing demands by Latin American
jurists and politicians and diplomats to
give up the right of conquest. I mean
the United States continued to hold on
to the right of conquest throughout the
19th century. It basically justified the
war with Mexico, Indian removal. The
right of conquest was taught in US
textbooks up until the 1920s. Latin
America had revoked the right of
conquest with its independence because
SpanishAmerican nations came into the
world together already a league of
nations. Seven nations that had to learn
to live with each other on a crowded
continent. The United States came into
being a single nation on the eastern
coast of a great landmass that it
imagined as empty. Obviously, it wasn't
empty. There was Native Americans, there
was Mexican, there was Spaniards, but
the United States, there was no doubt
that the United States was going to
reach the Pacific and it held on and
used the doctrine of conquest in order
to justify taking all of that land.
Latin America was constantly trying to
force the United States to accept that
the doctrine of conquest was abregated,
was void. And it wasn't until 1933 that
it did. And it was Roosevelt who did
that. And he he recognized the absolute
sovereignty of Latin American nations.
And he gave up the right of
intervention. And that was an enormous
turnaround in US power. It didn't weaken
US power by any means. It actually
strengthened it because it focused it.
It taught the United States how to
exercise power more efficiently and it
and it organized Latin America. It was
10 years of goodwill that really got
Latin America kind of on board for the
coming war against fascism. There was a
lot of fear among strategists within the
Franklin Roosevelt administration that
all of Latin America could have gone the
way of Spain. I mean a lot of the
sociological variables that led to the
rise of fascism or philangism in Spain
were present in Latin America. There was
uh large group of surviile peasants, a
small group of land owners, patrician
conservative Catholics, an increasingly
militant unions and peasants threatening
the power of the landed class. you know
that was Spain but it was also Latin
America writ large and if Latin America
fell to philanism then you know United
States would be kind of cornered between
Nazism, fascism and philangism.
Roosevelt's conceding to Latin America's
demand to give up the right to
intervention basically tilted the
playing field to the left in Latin
America. You know Roosevelt tolerated
economic nationalists. He let
revolutionaries in Mexico nationalize
Standard Oil and and appropriate massive
amounts of US-owned property and it
created enormous goodwill and and and
set the stage for the United States's
entrance into World War II from a
position of strength and continental
unity.
>> So you mentioned okay at various times
the jurists [snorts] in Latin America
they push back against this notion of
American absolute sovereignty and these
fights. This gets to a question. I see
it debated on Twitter a lot. What do you
say to someone who says international
law doesn't exist? What is international
law doesn't exist? And how is this term
useful or not useful?
>> Well, I'm an historian. I'm not a I'm
not a lawyer or a jurist. So, I tend to
see things in terms of power relations.
So I think I see law as a moral venue
that is created that creates a set of
normative principles in which people can
fight over. So you know obviously the
international law doesn't exist in some
void in which absolute justice is is
going to happen. You know, the most
powerful country decides the exception.
And you know, the United States to the
degree that countries like the United
States submit to a system of
international law, it usually was during
moments of weakness like when Roosevelt
did it in 1933 at the height of the
Great Depression and and with fascism on
the rise. But it does create these norms
and these principles that people fight
and argue over and so yes and the
liberal international law order that has
supposedly governed the world since the
creation of the United Nations in 1945.
the hypocrisies and the variances and
the exceptions are many and there's
always workarounds and and the United
States and and the Soviet Union
certainly found ways to skirt, you know,
any kind of limits that were placed on
them by international law. But it does
kind of create a venue, right, a moral
arena in which right and wrong could be
understood and argued over. You know
there's very other very little recourse
for poor and weak nations to defend
themselves. I mean we can go back to
ducidities right the strong do what they
will and the weak suffer what they must
and the conceit that there is such a
thing as international law that is
somehow transcendent of power relations
is you know it might just be a conceit
but it's still at least creates terms on
which nations could deal with each other
and and you know and and again Latin
America and the United States is
absolutely a perfect example of that for
Latin America's commitment to
sovereignty
and to cooperative relations was largely
forged in relationship to living under
what was becoming the most powerful
nation in world history as it moved
across the Pacific as it took Texas, as
it took Mexico, as it took Cuba, as it
took Puerto Rico, as it took Panama, you
know. So you had these jurists like
writing law books and coming up with
these legal principles. And the way they
get implemented though often is really
about power. So you know Argentine legal
theorists for instance Luis Drago for
instance at the early 20th century when
Italian and British and German warboats
were showing up at Venezuela trying to
collect debt. debt that had gone back to
the colony that European banks were
claiming that Venezuela owed because the
Spanish crown, you know, contracted
loans in 1776 and whenever whenever they
did, Luis Drago issued a principle, the
Drago doctrine that you cannot use
coercion to collect debt. Now, the
United States collected plenty of debt
through coercion. And we could we could
look at Donald Trump and what's going on
in Venezuela right now. But the United
States kind of liked the Drago doctrine
because they didn't want Italian and
German and British warships flitting
around the Caribbean bombing the coast
of Colombia or or Venezuela trying to
seize hold of the customhouse to get the
receipts. They thought that okay, so
we'll support the Drago doctrine. This
this will give us a leverage in keeping
Europe out of our backyard. So you you
kind of see the back and forth between
law as a kind of moral principle that
transcends social power, but then it's,
you know, it's obviously subordinated
and implemented through social power.
[music]
>> [music]
>> What's your sense of the actual goals
behind the Venezuela move? Because if
you look at the national security
strategy document, they talk about the
US reasserting its preeeminence in the
Western Hemisphere. And I don't know how
you measure preeeminence, right? That
seems a pretty broad term. Meanwhile,
Trump has talked very explicitly about
Venezuelan oil belonging to the US.
There's no regime change on the horizon.
They're not pressing for that. So, what
is the ultimate goal of all of this?
What are they aiming for?
>> Well, you know, it's hard to say. As I
said earlier, Trump is doing what a
number of his predecessors have done
during moments of of US kind of
recession of US power in the world. They
turn back to Latin America. But in some
ways it's pure Trumpism, right? It's
just this theatrical spectacle.
You know, he said it was about oil.
Well, first it was about immigration,
then it was about gangs, then it was
about fentanyl and drugs, and then he
then he landed on oil, getting our oil
back. Oil is trading at an all-time low.
Maybe not an all-time low, but it's
pretty low. The market is filled
fluttered with oil and to get Venezuela
back online is going to cost an enormous
amount of capital investment and there's
not a lot of oil companies that are
rushing. They're going to rush into
Venezuela then do that. You know, I
think Trump there was just playing to
his base. I think he was he was, you
know, I think his base likes the idea of
Trump as a pirate, Trump as a colonial
plunderer, you know, and and yeah, yeah,
we'll get our oil back. You know, just
like with the Iraq war in 2003, there's
always ways to get oil, right? There's
many ways to get oil. Like, you don't
have to start a a global war on terror
in order to secure Iraqi oil. You could
have just, you know, made a deal with
Saddam Hussein and got the oil. You
could have did the same thing with, you
know, so material interests are always
understood through a prism of ideology.
And so, part of it was that Venezuela
has been in crisis for a long time. I
mean, that's a whole another story for a
whole another show. And you know, a
hedgeimon like the United States can't
have that kind of crisis. I mean,
millions of Venezuelans were fleeing the
country. I mean, you don't have to be
carrying water for Trump's nivism and
his border policies at all to say that
that kind of disruption and that kind of
chaos can't go on forever in a regional
hegeimon's hinterland. And so, you have
to kind of do something. The question
is, what are you going to do? And Trump
seems to like these targeted attacks,
right? Whether they're in Iran, whether
in the in Nigeria, you know, these
oneanddone attacks. And I think he was
sold on the idea that, you know, if they
just took out Maduro and left the Maduro
state intact, because it is very much
ingrained and embedded in Venezuelan
society. I think there were a couple of
intelligent people in Marco Rubio's
State Department that didn't want to see
a repeat of 2003 with what happened
after debatification
in Iraq, the complete chaos. So Trump
was convinced that you, you know, you do
this one and done thing and then you
just kind of continue to threaten the
country in order to it it corresponds to
his way of being. There's no morality.
There's no normative sense. There's no
idealism. You know, normally when
presidents turn back to Latin America to
kind of regroup or rebalance after
global crisis, they kind of come up with
new kind of world views to widen their
electoral base to deepen their coalition
to, you know, they try to create a sense
of hijgemony. Right? So you had FDR
using Latin America to put forth a kind
of social democratic continental New
Deal and Reagan after Vietnam a kind of
muscular anti-communist liberalism but
understood in moral terms a kind of
reassertion of American purpose American
sets of itself as a defender of world
freedom you know and and these become
kind of governing ideologies that are
durable able they last. I mean, the New
Deal coalition lasted for decades up
until the 1970s. Reaganism lasted, you
know, at least until Barack Obama, if
not if not even even further in terms of
the world view. I mean, Trump isn't even
trying to cobble together a new
[laughter] world view, right? Trump
isn't coming up with any kind of, you
know, it's he's not doing it for
freedom. He's not doing it for
individual rights. He's not he's
certainly not doing it for social
democracy, you know, he's demanding
tribute, right? He's just trying to turn
Venezuela into a vassal state. But I
think that speaks to the moral emptiness
of him and his [laughter]
and and his political movement. And
Reagan and FDR presided over
majoritarian movements, right? They won
overwhelmingly at the electoral. You
know, Trump pretty much is running a
minority movement that is only in power
because of the anti-majoritarian
political structure of the United States
and Trump's dominance of the Republican
party. So, he doesn't seem interested at
all in turning Trumpism into a governing
coalition. He just wants to continue to
stoke the culture wars, continue to, you
know, stoke the grievances of tribal
nationalism of the American firsters and
hence the Monroe Doctrine.
>> [snorts]
>> You know, to bring it back to the Monroe
Doctrine, the Monroe Doctrine and
American First Nationalism, there was
always a strong kind of correlation
between the two. American first
nationalists, right? Even the the
pre-Trump ones, the ones from the 1920s
and leading up into World War II, they
liked the Monroe Doctrine because it
wasn't universalist. [clears throat]
It wasn't international law. It was
customary law specifically related to US
power within its hemisphere. And so the
Monroe Doctrine, it makes sense that
Trump as the standard bearer of today's
iteration of America first nationalism
would latch on to the Monroe Doctrine as
a kind of substitute for liberal
internationalism. Yeah, I think this is
maybe the most fascinating element of
all the complete lack of pretense
really, right? And obviously you
mentioned at various times international
policy has had some storyline. We all
know what the story we were going to
turn Iraq into a democracy and then that
would spread throughout the Middle East
and then there would be other
democracies and then be rich and be
stable etc. There's some story. I think
that is so striking about Trumpism or at
least this particular move really just
sort of the complete lack of like a
broader story. You mentioned also of
course which I think is um notable about
Trump foreign policy this appeal of
these sort of oneandone things because
okay there seems to be post Iraq this
sort of national backlash towards or
certainly post Afghanistan this backlash
towards boots on the ground long wars
forever wars etc. But there also does
seem to be this impulse of just, yeah,
but we still want to do something
powerful. We still want to show that
we're tough. And so then the way that
they solve the problem is by these
one-offs. We're going to do a one
bombing run in Iran. We're going to
arrest a foreign leader. Is there any
precedent for that or is this truly like
sort of feel uncharted territory when
you think about these arcs of uh foreign
policy?
>> Yeah. Yeah. Well, in Latin America,
there are two precedents. One is
obviously Manuel Noriega in 1989 when
George HW Bush sent about 30,000 Marines
in to capture Noriega on a on a warrant
basically to arrest him. It was
considered a police action and and
that's how it was legally justified.
Noriega was an ally of the United
States. He was a CIA asset in the 1980s.
He was very much involved in the
complexities of Iran Contra, but he
played all sides against the other. I
think he was selling information and
intelligence to Cuba. He was also
working with Mossad. And when the cold
war ended and the Berlin wall fell, his
usefulness had largely come to an end
and the United States decided that they
were going to take him out. There was a
Saiy report in the New York Times that
detailed his deep involvement in drug
running and and it couldn't be ignored
anymore. And so they went in and they
arrested him. So that's one president. A
lesser discussed one is in Haiti in
2005. Jean Petron Adersteed was
president of Haiti and there was a
USbacked coup but it was one of these
coups that were kind of carried out by
democracy promotion organizations that
were funded by aid and the National
Endowment for Democracy that
destabilized the country to the point
where Irish couldn't govern and George
W. Bush sent Marines in and basically
put a gun to his head and and and flew
him to the Congo where he still lives
now where is in exile. So So it's
happened before. I think what is
unprecedented is this idea that we are
just going to accept oil tribute from
Venezuela that we're just going to give
these directives to the Venezuelan
government and they're going to send I
mean I mean we talk about international
law. All of this stuff is just
unilateral US projections of its power.
I mean, the United States placed
sanctions on Venezuela. That's not
international law. I mean, news the
papers talk about it as, you know,
Venezuela is trying to violate sanctions
by finding workarounds to sell its oil.
It's like, why not? It's their oil. It's
the United States just putting the
sanctions on just because it's not like
it's not like the nations of the world
voted on putting sanctions on Venezuela.
But in any case, I think what is
unprecedented is what they're working
out and they seem to be working it out
on a as you go basis. It doesn't seem
like they have a clear plan. You're
right. They don't want it to be 2003
Iraq. They don't want boots on the
ground. They know the rank and file of
Trump. It has a very low tolerance for
for casualties and and fatalities and
America [clears throat] first
nationalism doesn't doesn't want to be
involved in nation building. But what
you're seeing is, I think, two distinct
trajectories. On the one hand, they're
imagining some system in which that
Venezuela just continues to kind of pay
a tribute to the United States through
oil. But then when Marco Rubio talks
about it, he says, well, we have these
different phases of reconstruction and
transition to democracy planned out in
Venezuela. So that kind of suggests more
of a direct role in pushing the country
in a certain direction politically, not
just leaving it as it is as long as it
continues to send the ships, you know,
just like during colonial times. I mean,
the colony sent the ships filled with
gold to Spain. [laughter]
Now they're sending the ships filled
with oil to Port Arthur, Texas.
>> All right, Greg, we're going to have to
leave it there, but thank you so much
for coming on All Thoughts. That was
fantastic. [music] Really appreciate it.
>> Thanks. Thanks so much for having me.
[music]
Joe, that was absolutely fascinating.
The point that stood out to me was this
idea of going into your own backyard to
assert your dominance as a sort of
replacement or offset to a decline of
multilateralism elsewhere in the world.
Like that kind of makes sense.
>> And it's very interesting that there's
this pattern, this historical pattern in
the United States that essentially Latin
America is where we go to dominate when
we're internally weak. And of course, I
think people would agree that the US is
feeling particularly weak on a number of
angles. There's obviously the sort of
existential threat, anxiety about the
rise of China, etc. So maybe it's this
kind of thing. Okay, we are not going to
be at least for the moment the global
power that we once were, etc. But in the
absence of that, at least we can still
establish that we get to decide who the
president of various Latin American
states are,
>> right? Latin American dominant power.
>> By the way, have you seen the Marco
Rubio meme where he's like covered in
all these different flags from Latin
America [laughter]
>> basically responsible for everything? I
know I have seen the memes about the
various jobs that Marco Rubio is sort of
de facto having to play on this. Rubio
strikes me as like a sort of interesting
bridge figure between the sort of
because you know I think of him as sort
of being like a sort of retro like cold
warrior type and someone who does
probably have like believes like oh
we're going to like spread democracy
throughout the world and wants to see
Latin America sort of be you know run by
liberal democrats, capitalist countries
and so forth. But obviously he's in an
administration that does not have the
same impulse for that. And so, you know,
to some extent it feels like this
operation, it's like it's like they're
gonna like split the difference, right?
So, he gets to be involved in taking out
a Latin American leader, which he finds
to be hostile, but the idea that like it
does not feel like this administration
is going to have much follow through in
terms of, okay, now we really want to
set Venezuela on a new political course,
>> right? I mean, I guess we'll see
ultimately what they prioritize there.
But in the meantime, shall we leave it
there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our guest
Greg Grandon. He's gregen. Follow our
producers Kerman Rodriguez at Kerman
Arman Dash Bennett at Dashbot and
Kellbrooks at Kellbrooks. For more
OddLotss content, go to
bloomberg.com/odlotss
with the daily newsletter and all of our
episodes. And you can chat about all of
these topics 247 in our Discord,
discord.gg/odlots.
And if [music] you enjoy OddLots, if you
found this conversation and our coverage
on Venezuela to be useful, [music] then
please leave us a positive review on
your favorite podcast platform. And
remember, if you are a Bloomberg [music]
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely adree. All you need
to do is find the Bloomberg channel on
Apple Podcasts [music] and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
[music]
Oh [music]
[singing]
yeah. [music]